# Exercises series #2— Transactional Processing

## 1. Learning Resources

For this exercises, you will need to use some resources handed for the Module M1, Transactional Processing:

- Ramez Elmasri, Sham Navathe, Chapter 22: Concurrency Control Techniques
- Personal learning assistant Sisi T.
- Podcast #2: Concurrency Control Techniques in Database Systems

## 2. Learning Goals

- Know and explain what anomalies result from concurrent transactions;
- Identify possible anomalies in transactions;
- Choose the lowest isolation level that resolves the identified anomalies;

## 3. Prerequisites

- Basioc SQL knowledge (SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, JOINs, ...)
- Exercice séries #1 completed at leats parts 1 and 4.

---

## Fundamental Concepts

- (a) Can you name the anomalies caused by concurrent transactions? Give an example of each, indicating why the anomalies may have made the database inconsistent.
    - [answwer](./3.1.1.md)
- (b) Name one anomaly that a non cascadeless schedule has?
    - [answwer](./3.1.2.md)
- (c) What are the anomalies of a non-recoverable schedule?
    - [answwer](./3.1.3.md)
- (d) What are the anomalies that a strict schedule solve?
    - [answwer](./3.1.4.md)

---

## Transaction Scheduling

- (a) Consider the following transactions:

    |T#| A | B | C |
    |-----------|---|---|---|
    |T1=<|a ←r(X),|(a + 1) →w(X),|c>|
    |T2=<|b →w(X),|b →w(Y ),|c>|
    |T3=<|a ←r(Y ),|a ←r(Y ),|c>|
    |T4=<|d →w(Y ),|d →w(X),|c>|
    |T5=<|d ←r(X),|(d ×2) →w(X),|c>|
    
    For each of the following schedules, identify:
    
    - The anomalies resulting from concurrency;
        - [answwer](./3.2.1.md)
    - Which transaction(s) have the anomalies;
        - [answwer](./3.2.2.md)
    - What level of isolation should be placed on each transaction;
        - [answwer](./3.2.3.md)

    | # | Scheduling |
    |---|-------------|
    |i. |< T 4A, T 2A, T 2B , T 2C , T 4B , T 4C >|
    |ii.|< T 4A, T 1A, T 4B , T 1B , T 1C , T 4C >|
    |iii.|< T 5A, T 1A, T 5B , T 1B , T 1C , T 5C >|
    |iv.|< T 3A, T 2A, T 2B , T 3B , T 3C , T 2C >|
    

---

## Free exploration

- Unzip the content of the zip file attached.
- Explore the examples inside each folder, follow the instructions and formulate you own ideas of what happens, why it happens, and why it matters.

### Prerequisites - development environment configuration:

- Install [docker desktop](https://www.docker.com)
- Install and run image postgresql:latest and configure at least host port *(5432)* and in Environmet *"POSTGRESQL_PASSWORD=password"*
- Install [pgadmin](https://www.pgadmin.org) or similar and connect to the running container
- Open 2 tabs to simulate 2 users

### Responses:

- [Test1](./3.0.1.md)
- [Test2](./3.0.2.md)
- [Test3](./3.0.3.md)
- [Test4](./3.0.4.md)
- [Test5](./3.0.5.md)

--- 

## Reflection & Wrap-up

- (a) How does the isolation level in SQL transactions affect the occurrence of anomalies like dirty reads and unrepeatable reads?
    - [answwer](./3.3.1.md)
- (b) A non-repeatable read is a special case of a phantom, or is it the other way round?
    - [answwer](./3.3.2.md)
- (c) How do the ACID properties ensure that concurrent transaction execution does not lead to anomalies like unrepeatable reads?
    - [answwer](./3.3.3.md)
- (d) How does the system log contribute to both durability and recovery in the presence of anomalies caused by concurrent transactions?
    - [answwer](./3.3.4.md)
- (e) Why might a non-serial schedule still be considered correct, and how does this relate to the concept of equivalence in schedules?
    - [answwer](./3.3.5.md)
- (f) How does the concept of strict schedules relate to the ACID property of Durability, and why is it important for crash recovery?
    - [answwer](./3.3.6.md)
- (g) How does the isolation level “READ UNCOMMITTED” affect schedule properties such as recoverability and serializability?
    - [answwer](./3.3.7.md)
- (h) How do isolation levels influence whether a schedule is recoverable, cascadeless, or strict?
    - [answwer](./3.3.8.md)

> ISEL/IPL, 2025, Ana Rita Beire, Gustavo Jacinto, João Vitorino, Matilde Pato & Nuno Datia

